---
layout: post
title:  First month recap
date:   2019-01-21
# excerpt:
log: true
tag:
    - QuickLinks
    - Certificate
    - LogonInfo
    - Keyboard
    - Layout
    - Registry
    - PowerShell
comments: true
---

Keeping a log of things I come across, discover or learn is a very recent
idea, so I didn't write anything down before. I'll still try to get a list
about what I remember from January.

## miscellaneous

- Read [Learn PowerShell Scripting in a Month of Lunches](https://www.manning.com/books/learn-powershell-scripting-in-a-month-of-lunches),
  in about four days (I was ripe). The best thing I read since their
  previous book. I started to rewrite scripts right away.
- Definitely made the switch to VSCode, thanks to the former.
- Started to read a lot about Pester, that one is more difficult,
  you've got to change your frame of mind, and it gets in the way of
  **doing**. But I'll persevere, I see how important it is.
- Upgraded ITIL certification to ITIL2011
- You can forget the "Get-" part of any Get-Smthing cmdlet.
- Execution Policy set by GPO cannot be overwritten. But the Authorization
  Manager is an object that can be manipulated as any object in Powershell.
- AD cmdlets have a quirk: their properties are not fixed. It obviously comes
  with the territory of the -Properties parameter, but it's worse than that:
  when you try to access a property, it creates it, usually empty. So there's
  no testing for a AD attribute existence by query the corresponding property:
  it always exists, as soon as you try to look for it. What's that for an
  [observer effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Observer_effect), he?

## Quick Access links and default names

- Had a problem about QuickLinks shortcuts ending in $, in
  Citrix sessions (so resolution could not be deferred to
  second session, looking at you, Desktop.ini):
  - *Win32_MappedLogicalDisk* has the drives
  - Display names for mapped drives are at
    `HKCU:\Software\Microsoft\Windows\CurrentVersion\Explorer\MountPoints2`
  - Two properties: *_LabelFromDesktopINI* & *_LabelFromRegistry*. The later wins.
  - Works immediately (for newly opened windows).
  - Quick Access items can be listed and accessed this way:

```powershell
$QuickAccess = New-Object -ComObject shell.application
$QuickAccess.Namespace("shell:::{679f85cb-0220-4080-b29b-5540cc05aab6}").Items()
```

## Self signed certificates for local development

- Needed self signed certificates for PowerShell development:
  - `New-SelfSignedCertificate`
  - Move created cert to Cert:\<user or machine>\Root to allow signing
  - Copy (export/import) to Cert:\<user or machine>\TrustedPublisher for
    no-nagging execution.

## Getting current user info

- `$env:USERNAME`, but can be tempered with.
- `[Environment]::UserName`, cannot be changed.
- `[Security.Principal.WindowsIdentity]::GetCurrent()` is a secure as it gets.
  Includes short domain name, SID, isSystem (great for scripts)...
- Good way to interrogate Active Directory from a station without the
  AD module: FindByIndentity() in the
  DirectoryServices.AccountManagement.UserPrincipal namespace.
- FindByIdentity() only provides default attributes. You can find the others
  thanks to the GetUnderLyingObject() member function.
- The user currently logged on the console can be found in the UserName property
  of the single *Win32_ComputerSystem* instance. Doesn't work for RDP.
- Had to write a `New-ProtocolAgnosticCimSession`, our security still thinks
  it's 2011.
- To find logon time for the current user:

```powershell
$Account = Get-CimInstance Win32_UserAccount -filter ...
$Account | Get-CimAssociatedInstance -ResultClassName Win32_LogonSession
```

It's a pain in the arse because *Win32_UserAccount* gets all domain accounts and
is awfully slow (but on my station, why?), though. But you can trick the system by
creating the account with `New-CimInstance -ClientOnly`. Needs Caption, User,
Domain, and the later two as keys.

### Keyboard information

That was a fun one: I needed to export all keyboard information for users. We
have a hugely multilingual environment with custom keymaps. The info can be
found by following this Rube Goldberg machine:

- The preload (list of keyboard/languages) is in `HKU:\Keyboard Layout\Preload`
- The language ID is the last four bytes of the preload.
- Info about he language can be found with
  *[Globalization.CultureInfo]::new(Language ID as hexa)*
- If there is an value in `HKCU:Keyboard Layout\Substitute` whose name is the
  preload, it means than the keyboard is not the default one for the language.
- The Keyboard layout ID is then either the one in Preload, or the one in
  substitute, if it exists.
- Each Keyboard Layout ID (should) have its own key in
  `HKLM:\SYSTEM\ControlSet001\Control\Keyboard Layouts`
- The property *Layout Text* contains the English name of the layout.
- The property *Layout Display Name* points to the DLL containing the localized name.
- That last piece of info usually does not exist for non standard layouts.
- [It **is** possible to extract those strings from DLLs in Powershell](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/45953778/how-to-use-powershell-to-extract-data-from-dll-or-exe-files/).
